OSDOCS-19231: adds tool revocation to MCP gateway docs (#110614)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/proc-mcp-gateway-filter-revoked-tools-display.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// *mcp_gateway_config/mcp-gateway-revoke-tool-access.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="proc-mcp-gateway-filter-revoked-tools-display_{context}"]
= Filtering revoked tools from tool/list display

[role="_abstract"]
After you revoke a tool by using your identity provider, `tools/call` requests are blocked. However, the revoked tool is still displayed in `tools/list` responses. To filter revoked tools from the displayed list, you must give the MCP broker component a signed header that carries the user's authorized tools.

You can accomplish this goal by configuring the Authorino Operator to generate the header by using a wristband JWT signed with an ECDSA key pair.

.Prerequisites

* You installed {mcpg}.
* You installed {prodname}.

> * You configured a `Gateway` object.

Reviewer: ### 
```suggestion
* You configured a `Gateway` object with both an `mcp` listener (public-facing) and an `mcps` listener (internal routing).
```

* You are logged into a running {ocp} cluster with an `admin` role.
* You configured an `HTTPRoute` object for the gateway.
* You registered an MCP server.

> * You created a `Secret` CR for authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You created a `Secret` CR for authentication.
* You configured authentication with an `AuthPolicy` CR on the `mcp` listener.                                                                                                      
* You configured authorization with a tool-level `AuthPolicy` CR on the `mcps` listener.
```

* You configured authorization with a tool-level `AuthPolicy` CR.

.Procedure

. Generate an ECDSA key pair by running the following commands:

.. Generate the private key and save it to a file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ openssl ecparam -name prime256v1 -genkey -noout -out private-key.pem
----

.. Generate the public key and save it to a file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ openssl ec -in private-key.pem -pubout -out public-key.pem
----

. Create a Kubernetes `Secret` object in the Authorino Operator namespace by adding the private key with the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create secret generic trusted-headers-private-key \
  --from-file=key.pem=private-key.pem \

>   -n kuadrant-system \

Reviewer: This is dependent on where RHCL is installed, so we should use a placeholder here.

  --dry-run=client -o yaml | oc apply -f -
----

. Create a Kubernetes `Secret` object in the MCP broker component namespace by adding the public key with the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc create secret generic trusted-headers-public-key \
  --from-file=key=public-key.pem \

>   -n mcp-system \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  -n _<mcp_system>_ \
```

  --dry-run=client -o yaml | oc apply -f -
----

> //Q: do we need to convert the PEM public key into a JWKS?

Author: ```suggestion
Q: do we need to convert the PEM public key into a JWKS?
```
@Patryk-Stefanski

Reviewer: no

. Delete the existing `AuthPolicy` CR by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----

> $ oc delete authpolicy _<mcp_auth_policy>_ -n _<gateway_system>_ --ignore-not-found

Reviewer: Possibly needs more clarification. At this point, they have two authPolicies: the authentication policy on the MCP listener and the authorization policy on the mcps listener. Only the MCP listener policy should be deleted and replaced with the wristband version; the mcps authorization policy must remain in place.

  rules:
    authentication:
      'keycloak':
        jwt:
          issuerUrl: http://keycloak.example.com:port/realms/mcp
    authorization:
      'allow-mcp-method':
        patternMatching:
          patterns:
          - predicate: |
              !request.headers.exists(h, h == 'x-mcp-method') || (request.headers['x-mcp-method'] in ["tools/list","initialize","notifications/initialized"])
      'authorized-tools':
        opa:
          rego: |
            allow = true
            tools = { server: roles | server := object.keys(input.auth.identity.resource_access)[_]; roles := object.get(input.auth.identity.resource_access, server, {}).roles }
          allValues: true
    response:
      success:
        headers:
          x-authorized-tools:
            wristband:
              issuer: 'authorino'
              customClaims:
                'allowed-tools':
                  selector: auth.authorization.authorized-tools.tools.@tostr
              tokenDuration: 300
              signingKeyRefs:
                - name: trusted-headers-private-key
                  algorithm: ES256
      unauthenticated:
        headers:
          'WWW-Authenticate':

>             value: Bearer resource_metadata=http://mcp.example.com:port/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/mcp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            value: Bearer resource_metadata=http://mcp.example.com:port/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource
```

        body:
          value: |
            {
              "error": "Unauthorized",
              "message": "Access denied: Authentication required."
            }
      unauthorized:
        code: 401
        headers:
          'WWW-Authenticate':

>             value: Bearer resource_metadata=http://mcp.example.com:port/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/mcp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            value: Bearer resource_metadata=http://mcp.example.com:port/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource
```

        body:
          value: |
            {
              "error": "Forbidden",
              "message": "Access denied: Unsupported method. New authentication required (401)."
            }
EOF
----
+
* Replace `_<mcp_auth_policy>_` with the name of your new `AuthPolicy` CR.
* Replace `_<gateway_system>_` with the namespace where your `AuthPolicy` CR is applied.

> * Replace `_<mcp_system>_` with the namespace where your {mcpg} deployment is applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Replace _<mcp_gateway>_ with the name of your Gateway CR.
```

Author: Not sure about this one.  Should this be the MCP gateway deployment namespace or the Gateway namespace?

See https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/109364#discussion_r3129279140

> My understanding is that <mcp_system> is the namespace where MCP Gateway bits and pieces are installed (Controller, Broker/Router, MCPGatewayExtension CR etc) and <gateway_namespace> is the namespace where Gateway CR is created

Reviewer: Looking at the above, there is no mcp_system placeholder in the YAML, so we can delete this last replace regardless.

But yes, the linked comment is correct.

Author: We do, it's in the `spec.targetRef.name` param under the metadata block.

. Configure the MCP broker component to validate the signed header by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----

> $ oc patch mcpgatewayextension mcp-gateway-extension -n _<mcp_gateway>_ --type='merge' \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ oc patch mcpgatewayextension _<mcp_gateway_extension>_ -n _<mcp_system>_ --type='merge' \
```

  -p='{"spec":{"trustedHeadersKey":{"secretName":"trusted-headers-public-key"}}}'
----
+
* Replace `_<mcp_gateway>_` with the name of your {mcpg} deployment.

> . Wait for the automatic MCP broker component redeployment to load the public key from the `Secret` CR created in the earlier step by running the following command"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Wait for the automatic MCP broker component redeployment to load the public key from the `Secret` CR created in the earlier step by running the following command
```

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// *mcp_gateway_config/mcp-gateway-revoke-tool-access.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="proc-mcp-gateway-filter-revoked-tools-display_{context}"]
= Filtering revoked tools from tool/list display

[role="_abstract"]
After you revoke a tool by using your identity provider, `tools/call` requests are blocked. However, the revoked tool is still displayed in `tools/list` responses. To filter revoked tools from the displayed list, you must give the MCP broker component a signed header that carries the user's authorized tools.

You can remove blocked tools from responses by configuring the Authorino Operator to generate the header by using a wristband JWT signed with an ECDSA key pair.

.Prerequisites

* You installed {mcpg}.
* You configured a `Gateway` object with both `mcp` and `mcps` listeners.
* You are logged into a running {ocp} cluster with an `admin` role.
* You configured an `HTTPRoute` object for the gateway.
* You registered an MCP server.

> * You created a `Secret` CR for authentication.

Reviewer 2: To be honest it's not clear to me what `Secret` this refers to

Author: A Kubernetes secret? Now that I backtrack upstream, I am not sure, either. Might be a carryover.

Reviewer 2: Yeah. I can't think of what Secret this could be either. There no mention of any secret in Authorization and Authentication guides (both upstream and downstream) either.

----
$ openssl ec -in private-key.pem -pubout -out public-key.pem
----

. Create a Kubernetes `Secret` object in the Authorino Operator namespace by adding the private key with the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc create secret generic trusted-headers-private-key \
  --from-file=key.pem=private-key.pem \
  -n _<kuadrant_system>_ \
  --dry-run=client -o yaml | oc apply -f -
----
+
Replace `_<kuadrant_system>_` with the namespace where {prodname} is installed.

. Create a Kubernetes `Secret` object in the MCP broker component namespace by adding the public key with the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc create secret generic trusted-headers-public-key \
  --from-file=key=public-key.pem \
  -n _<mcp_system>_ \
  --dry-run=client -o yaml | oc apply -f -
----
+
Replace `_<mcp_system>_` with the namespace where {mcpg} is installed.

. Delete only the existing `AuthPolicy` CR on the `mcp` listener by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc delete authpolicy _<mcp_authn_policy>_ -n _<gateway_system>_ --ignore-not-found
----
+
Replace `_<mcp_authn_policy>_` with the name of your `AuthPolicy` CR.

> Replace `_<gateway_system>_` with the name of your `Gateway` object.

Reviewer 2: This is wrong. It is true that the AuthPolicy can be created in the same namespace as the Gateway object but it can also be attached to HTTPRoute. Smt like would be more appropriate (feel free to reword):

Replace `_<gateway_system>_` with the name of a namespace where AuthPolicy was created.

+
[IMPORTANT]
====
You must delete the `AuthPolicy` CR and create a new one. Using `$ oc apply` merges both the new and old policies.
====

. Generate a new `x-authorized-tools` header by creating and applying a new `AuthPolicy` CR. Use the following example:
+
.Example AuthPolicy CR
[source,yaml]
----
$ oc create -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1
kind: AuthPolicy
metadata:
  name: _<mcp_auth_policy>_
  namespace: _<gateway_system>_
spec:
  targetRef:
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
    name: _<mcp_gateway>_
    sectionName: mcp
  when:
    - predicate: "!request.path.contains('/.well-known')"
  rules:
    authentication:
      'keycloak':
        jwt:

>           issuerUrl: http://keycloak.example.com:port/realms/mcp

Reviewer 2: minor, but in production we should use `https://` imo. There are two other `http://` occurrences in this guide.

                  algorithm: ES256
      unauthenticated:
        headers:
          'WWW-Authenticate':
            value: Bearer resource_metadata=http://mcp.example.com:port/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource
        body:
          value: |
            {
              "error": "Unauthorized",
              "message": "Access denied: Authentication required."
            }
      unauthorized:
        code: 401
        headers:
          'WWW-Authenticate':
            value: Bearer resource_metadata=http://mcp.example.com:port/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource
        body:
          value: |
            {
              "error": "Forbidden",
              "message": "Access denied: Unsupported method. New authentication required (401)."
            }
EOF
----
+
* Replace `_<mcp_auth_policy>_` with the name of your new `AuthPolicy` CR.
* Replace `_<gateway_system>_` with the namespace where your `AuthPolicy` CR is applied.
* Replace `_<mcp_gateway>_` with the name of your {mcpg} deployment.

. Configure the MCP broker component to validate the signed header by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----

> $ oc patch mcpgatewayextension _<mcp_gateway_extension>_ -n _<mcp_gateway>_ --type='merge' \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ oc patch mcpgatewayextension _<mcp_gateway_extension>_ -n _<mcp_system>_ --type='merge' \
```

  -p='{"spec":{"trustedHeadersKey":{"secretName":"trusted-headers-public-key"}}}'
----
+
* Replace `_<mcp_gateway_extension>_` with the name of your `MCPGatewayExtension` CR.

> * Replace `_<mcp_gateway>_` with the name of your {mcpg} deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Replace `_<mcp_system>_` with the namespace where {mcpg} is installed.
```

+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc rollout status deployment/_<mcp_gateway>_ -n _<mcp_system>_ --timeout=60s
----
+
* Replace `_<mcp_gateway>_` with the name of your {mcpg} deployment.
* Replace `_<mcp_system>_` with the namespace where your {mcpg} deployment is applied.

. If the redeployment does not start, force it by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc rollout restart deployment/_<mcp_gateway>_ -n _<mcp_system>_
----
+
* Replace `_<mcp_gateway>_` with the name of your {mcpg} deployment.
* Replace `_<mcp_system>_` with the namespace where your {mcpg} deployment is applied.

.Verification

. Verify that the new `AuthPolicy` CR is enforced by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc get authpolicy _<mcp_auth_policy>_ -n _<gateway_system>_ -o jsonpath='{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Enforced")].status}'
----
+
* Replace `_<mcp_auth_policy>_` with the name of your new `AuthPolicy` CR.
* Replace `_<gateway_system>_` with the namespace where your `AuthPolicy` CR is applied.
+
.Example output
[source,text]
----
True
----

> . Verify `tools/list` filtering by logging out and logging back in to get a fresh token. In the {keycloak} interface, under **Tools > List Tools**, the revoked tool is not displayed in the list. Only tools matching the user's `resource_access` roles are returned.

Reviewer 2: Not sure what's meant by that `Tools > List Tools`. Where in keycloak/RHBK interface I can find it? Maybe it is meant for MCP Inspector?

MCP Inspector is fine for verification. Alternatively you can show curl that does `tools/list` call to see that the revoked tool is indeed not in the list. Similar to https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/mcp-gateway-docs-tp/modules/proc-verify-virt-mcp-server.adoc

Author: That's from the upstream doc, so I am not sure. I cannot see the Keycloak UI. https://github.com/Kuadrant/mcp-gateway/blob/main/docs/guides/tool-revocation.md#step-5-verify-toolslist-filtering. 

Replaced with the MCP server command. Not sure how that would work unless we logged in as the user whose credentials we changed? PTAL

Reviewer 2: Ah, right, I should have taken a look at the upstream guide. Yes, it was meant for MCP Inspector, see https://github.com/Kuadrant/mcp-gateway/blob/main/docs/guides/tool-revocation.md#step-2-verify-toolscall-denial

Reviewer 2: I am sorry, I realized that prerequisites to this guide are AuthN and AuthR guide, so  Iam not sure how to get that SESSION_ID programatically because OAuth flow needs to be followed to actually acquire it.

In the end it might be simpler to use MCP Inspector for validation. However, we should use the same way of validation than what's in AuthN and AuthR guides. But in these guides there's no mention of MCP Inspector nor real end-to-end validation using `curl`. See:
https://110614--ocpdocs-pr.netlify.app/rhcl/latest/mcp_gateway_config/mcp-gateway-authentication
https://110614--ocpdocs-pr.netlify.app/rhcl/latest/mcp_gateway_config/mcp-gateway-authorization

In short, I can't think of any nice & easy way of validation, so  I would maybe rely on words only. The first sentence `Log out and log back in with the user credentials that you changed access for to get a fresh token.` is fine as is. Then there could be smt like (feel free to reword and reformat):

`Make a 'tools/list' call. The expected response is a list of all tools the user is authorized to call from all registered MCP servers.`

Remove the `curl` command example completely.

In both AuthN and AuthR guides the verification section is very limited compared to upstream guides so I think that we follow the same approach here and improve all three verification sections at once in a consistent way (either MCP Inspector, or `curl` commands or something else I can't think of right now)

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// *mcp_gateway_config/mcp-gateway-revoke-tool-access.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="proc-mcp-gateway-filter-revoked-tools-display_{context}"]

> = Filtering revoked tools from tool/list display

Reviewer 2: @ShaunaDiaz sorry, I should have noticed earlier, it should be `tools/list` here

Author: Nah, that's my bad, I should have checked all of them when you caught the other one.

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ openssl ec -in private-key.pem -pubout -out public-key.pem
----

. Create a Kubernetes `Secret` object in the Authorino Operator namespace by adding the private key with the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc create secret generic trusted-headers-private-key \
  --from-file=key.pem=private-key.pem \
  -n _<kuadrant_system>_ \
  --dry-run=client -o yaml | oc apply -f -
----
+
Replace `_<kuadrant_system>_` with the namespace where {prodname} is installed.

. Create a Kubernetes `Secret` object in the MCP broker component namespace by adding the public key with the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc create secret generic trusted-headers-public-key \
  --from-file=key=public-key.pem \
  -n _<mcp_system>_ \
  --dry-run=client -o yaml | oc apply -f -
----
+
Replace `_<mcp_system>_` with the namespace where {mcpg} is installed.

. Delete only the existing `AuthPolicy` CR on the `mcp` listener by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc delete authpolicy _<mcp_authn_policy>_ -n _<authn_namespace>_ --ignore-not-found
----
+

> Replace `_<mcp_authn_policy>_` with the name of your `AuthPolicy` CR.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Replace `_<mcp_authn_policy>_` with the name of your `AuthPolicy` CR.
```

> Replace `_<authn_namespace>_` with the namespace where your `AuthPolicy` CR is applied.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Replace `_<authn_namespace>_` with the namespace where your `AuthPolicy` CR is applied.
```

          x-authorized-tools:
            wristband:
              issuer: 'authorino'
              customClaims:
                'allowed-tools':
                  selector: auth.authorization.authorized-tools.tools.@tostr
              tokenDuration: 300
              signingKeyRefs:
                - name: trusted-headers-private-key
                  algorithm: ES256
      unauthenticated:
        headers:
          'WWW-Authenticate':
            value: Bearer resource_metadata=https://mcp.example.com:port/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource
        body:
          value: |
            {
              "error": "Unauthorized",
              "message": "Access denied: Authentication required."
            }
      unauthorized:
        code: 401
        headers:
          'WWW-Authenticate':
            value: Bearer resource_metadata=https://mcp.example.com:port/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource
        body:
          value: |
            {
              "error": "Forbidden",
              "message": "Access denied: Unsupported method. New authentication required (401)."
            }
EOF
----
+
* Replace `_<mcp_auth_policy>_` with the name of your new `AuthPolicy` CR.

> * Replace `_<authn_namespace>_` with the namespace where your `AuthPolicy` CR is applied.

Reviewer 2: This sounds a bit weird to me. You are creating an new AuthPolicy and you are supposed to use namespace name where the AuthPolicy is applied? - that's a bit of a chicken-egg problem no?

Before creating this new AuthPolicy one needs to remove existing AuthPolicy (created as part of AuthN/AuthR guides which are prerequisites to this guide). Looking at AuthR guide, there's the same chicken-egg problem as here. AuthN guide says to create the AuthPolicy in the same namespace where the Gateway object is.

Here it might be safer to say to replace the _<authn_namespace>_  with the same namespace where was the removed original AuthPolicy

+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc patch mcpgatewayextension _<mcp_gateway_extension>_ -n _<mcp_system>_ --type='merge' \
  -p='{"spec":{"trustedHeadersKey":{"secretName":"trusted-headers-public-key"}}}'
----
+
* Replace `_<mcp_gateway_extension>_` with the name of your `MCPGatewayExtension` CR.
* Replace `_<mcp_system>_` with the namespace where {mcpg} is installed.

. Wait for the automatic MCP broker component redeployment to load the public key from the `Secret` CR created in the earlier step by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc rollout status deployment/_<mcp_gateway>_ -n _<mcp_system>_ --timeout=60s
----
+
* Replace `_<mcp_gateway>_` with the name of your {mcpg} deployment.
* Replace `_<mcp_system>_` with the namespace where your {mcpg} deployment is applied.

. If the redeployment does not start, force it by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc rollout restart deployment/_<mcp_gateway>_ -n _<mcp_system>_
----
+
* Replace `_<mcp_gateway>_` with the name of your {mcpg} deployment.
* Replace `_<mcp_system>_` with the namespace where your {mcpg} deployment is applied.

> .Verification

Reviewer 3: @ShaunaDiaz PTAL

> . Verify that the new `AuthPolicy` CR is enforced by running the following command:

Reviewer 3: In OCP single step procedures usually get `*`. That might be different than RHSSG--not sure. 

```suggestion
* Verify that the new `AuthPolicy` CR is enforced by running the following command:
```

Author: there are three steps, I just had that duplicate title in there

+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ oc get authpolicy _<mcp_auth_policy>_ -n _<authn_namespace>_ -o jsonpath='{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Enforced")].status}'
----
+
* Replace `_<mcp_auth_policy>_` with the name of your new `AuthPolicy` CR.
* Replace `_<authn_namespace>_` with the namespace where your `AuthPolicy` CR is applied.
+
.Example output
[source,text]
----
True
----

> .Verification

Reviewer 3: I don't think that two `.Verification` sections will work in DITA, but I might be wrong. Might want to check if there are any ADV errors locally on this file.
